Uber: the villain everyone loves to use
It is hard to think of an industry where customer service is as reliably bad as taxis. It is hard to think of an industry where customer service is as reliably bad as taxis. Even today, with all the competition biting at their heels, taxi drivers still fail to show up for bookings, refuse to take short trips, and are accused of treating customers with contempt.

Globally taxi drivers and operators have been protected by excessive regulation that shuts out competition and guarantees business, no matter how bad the service is. It is low-hanging fruit for technology-based disrupters like Uber.

But while Uber may be popular among users, it is a villain to taxi drivers, regulators, employment law and government revenue. And even to some UberX drivers, who have told Fairfax Media it took them months to realise how little money they were making. Turns out to be about $10.70 an hour once all operating and self-employment costs are taken into account.

But there are reasons why taxis have been so unlikeable. Until Victoria began to reform the industry in 2012, there were a limited number of perpetual taxi licences that cost more than half a million dollars each. Drivers took 50 per cent of fares, operators got the rest. There was no money left over for car maintenance or driver training because profits went into paying off the licence. And monopoly breeds greed.

Now, anyone can buy a one-year licence for $22,000 from the Taxi Services Commission and drivers get 55 per cent of the fare. Drivers are better paid but must work harder for it. Those who have been in the game less than five years must pass the challenging knowledge test.

The reform has opened up some new competition, such as the new fleet of CABiTs, and new apps like GoCatch are working with the industry to improve service.

Meanwhile, Uber is rapidly growing as an alternative form of transport, particularly its low-cost UberX service. This is the one which allows anyone with a car to sign up as a driver and become an instant hire car for people booking rides using the Uber app.

Taxi drivers are furious, and on Thursday protested outside Victoria's Parliament House demanding the government shut down UberX or force drivers to pay licence fees.

A representative of taxi and hire-car licence holders, David Singh, said 24-hour strikes would start in Victoria, Queensland, WA and NSW next week.

Uber argues it is increasing the size of the pie, not taking crumbs away from taxi drivers. It has shown state governments a chart citing taxi industry statistics that shows the number of taxi trips increased after Uber arrived in Australia.

Australian Taxi Industry Association chief executive Blair Davies

claims the increase is actually due to a change in the way the number of jobs was collected in 2014 compared to 2013. "It is entirely likely the 2015 statistics will be down on the 2014 statistics," he adds.

Uber was created in San Francisco in 2009 as a luxury car service. The company is now valued at $US50 billion. Not only has its popularity reached dizzying heights, it has garnered the type of customer loyalty most brands would kill for. Social media feeds are filled with friends raving about the service, the cost, and the ease of use.

University of Melbourne marketing lecturer Dr Brent Coker said there's a "cool factor" to Uber which has allowed it to continue to grow in the face of allegations of operating illegally, surge pricing, and poor driver pay.

Primarily, UberX is popular because it gives consumers hire-car services for lower prices than taxis would charge. According to Victoria's regulations, hire cars cannot stand in taxi ranks and are a booking-only service. Hire cars are usually better quality than taxis, unmarked, and professional. Sound familiar?

But it costs $40,000 for a hire-car licence in metropolitan Melbourne, payable to the TSC, plus drivers have to sit a version of the knowledge test.

UberX drivers do not pay this $40,000 fee or get endorsement from the TSC, as hire-car drivers and UberBlack drivers do. UberBlack is more expensive than UberX.

In Western Australia, Uber has avoided prosecution by blocking Department of Transport compliance officers from using its app, so they can't book UberX rides to find drivers. Prosecution of 24 UberX drivers in NSW collapsed because existing laws do not make it illegal to help someone else breach the state's Passenger Transport Act.

"This means that while ride-share drivers are committing offences, ride-share companies that connect customers with ride-share drivers may not be in breach of passenger transport law," the NSW government's Transport Taskforce discussion paper notes.

In Victoria the TSC's attempts to prosecute drivers is waiting on a decision in the Magistrate's Court, due on September 25. The matter involving driver Nathan Brenner serves as a test case for whether or not the TSC can successfully prosecute UberX drivers.

But it may end up being the Australian Tax Office which throws cold water on Uber's expansion in Australia.

Its declaration that UberX drivers must be classified as taxi drivers makes it a much less appealing way to earn money, because drivers have to pay GST on gross fares and report their income.

Uber increased fares by 10 per cent to make up for lost income, but has also taken the ATO to court over this definition. The case is due to be heard in mid-December.

But even if state governments grant UberX permission to operate, there remains a big question about the drivers' working conditions.

Uber now calls UberX drivers "partners", not employees.

"Ride-sharing is a new economic opportunity for everyday Australians ... They deserve the certainty of a modern regulatory framework – and to work free from the scaremongering of taxi plate monopolists," a spokeswoman said.

Employment law expert at University of Adelaide, Professor Andrew Stewart, says it is unclear if the current arrangement between Uber and UberX drivers is legal.

A driver who has been Ubering for nearly a year tells Fairfax Media his full-time annual wage totalled about $26,000.

In his best month fares totalled $6369, or $31 per hour. After deducting its 20 per cent commission, Uber deposited about $5100 in his bank. From that he spent about $900 on fuel, cleaning the car weekly, treats for passengers, and meals. This leaves about $4200.

"From looking at these numbers, it would be easy to say that a full-time Uber driver makes $40,000 per year. But that would be too simplistic. For a start, 80 per cent of these hours are at times when a regular employer would be obliged to pay some penalty rates," he says.

Uber recently sent out a press release saying it expects its drivers to make 20,000 trips during Spring Racing carnival. This "economic trickle down" will benefit more than 2000 Uber driver-partners, the public relations spruiker claims. The story first appeared on The Sydney Morning Herald.