We are not appy! ‘Crunch time’ for black cab drivers as they battle to save their livelihoods against phone gadget that threatens one of the capital’s most traditional jobs
Black cab drivers brought gridlock to Bank junction yesterday (Thursday) during their latest protest action 
    
 A black cab driver has a message for Mayor ‘BoJo’ Boris Johnson 
 
Published: 25 September, 2015 
by JANE CLINTON 
 
A BLACK cab driver rebellion against the Mayor of London and the minicab-service Uber has reached “crunch time” with a key legal dispute due to be settled in the High Court next month. 
 
The British taxi driver trade – which became an official profession after the 17th-century civil war back in the tumultuous days of Oliver Cromwell – is the oldest public transport system in the world. 
 
But its future has been placed under serious threat by the rise of the Uber app, which has flooded London with minicabs, and is squeezing the service toward extinction. 
 
Cab drivers, who have collectively chipped in £100 each to pay for a key legal hearing next month, say the popular service is not properly regulated is being given an “easy ride” by senior Conservative politicians. 
 
Terry Hedges, who has been a black cab driver for 15 years, said: “I’ve never been this political or this involved in my trade, but I am fighting for what I believe is right. 
 
“Uber seems to be able to do what it wants, it is not a level playing field. It is causing mayhem on the streets.”  
 
The 40-year-old father-of-three added: “I’m now approaching minimum wage.” 
 
There are 25,000 black taxis in London and an estimated 87,000 private hire cars. Of these, 15,000 are “Uber” cars – but it is claimed the numbers are swelling by 1,000 each month. 
 
Uber operates a car hire platform that connects passengers to thousands of drivers through an app on the passenger’s smartphone. Using the app, passengers can request to be picked up from any location within London. 
 
Collective protests using street blocking have been organised by the United Cabbies Group (UCG) – the latest this week saw Bank Junction brought to a standstill.  
 

 
Terry Hedges has been a black cab driver for 15 years 
 
Unite taxi trade rep Peter Rose warned that the situation on the capital’s streets had reached “crunch time”. The union has put forward proposals to Transport for London (TfL) to “professional­ise” the private hire industry, which could in turn reduce car numbers. 
 
“We are not denying people the right to earn a living,” he said. “But London cannot cope with the sheer numbers of private hire cars.”  
 
Fewer people have been taking the famous “knowledge” test and taxi drivers believe the drop in wages, around 25 per cent in the past two years, could be the reason.  
 
One Uber driver was reportedly earning £1.40 below the minimum wage and was working a 20-hour day to make ends meet. Uber, which is backed by Google and Goldman Sachs, operates in 60 countries around the world. One of Silicon Valley’s most successful start-ups, it is valued at $50billion. Yet the company’s CEO and co-founder Travis Kalanick does not pay UK Corporation Tax.  
 
Uber has been dogged by controversy since it first appeared in 2009 and has battled lawsuits around the world. In the UK it is now facing legal action brought by law firm Leigh Day, on behalf of the GMB, over pay, holiday allowance and the health and safety of Uber drivers.  
 
Uber does not provide its drivers with the rights normally afforded to workers, claiming instead that they are “partners”. Passengers pay Uber for the journey – with a percentage of that payment passed on to its “partners”.  
 
Leigh Day lawyers believe they are in breach of employment law and that there are serious health and safety issues. 
 
In a recent debate, mayoral hopefuls Zac Goldsmith and Sadiq Khan came out in support of black taxis and noted concern regarding Uber, which came to London in 2012. Mr Goldsmith warned that the days of black cabs on London streets “could be numbered” if action was not taken. He called on TfL and the government to define what “plying for hire” means, as some have argued that booking an Uber cab is comparable to hailing a cab and operates within the immediate hire market.  
 

 
Black cab drivers spell out their message at Bank junction 
 
The RMT union is asking for a statutory definition of this. He also suggested a “fleet-wide insurance” with the onus on the operator “to guarantee consumer safety”. Private hire vehicle regulations are currently under review through a TfL consultation.  
 
There is also a case at the High Court due to start on October 5 to determine whether the Uber app, which measures fares according to smartphone GPS estimates of a journey’s distance and time, can be classified as a taximeter.  
 
At present only black cabs are allowed taximeters. Many disgruntled taxi drivers who speak of Uber’s apparent “easy ride” point to the recent appointment of former Google spin doctor Rachel Whetstone – an old friend of David Cameron – as Uber’s senior vice-president.  
 
She met Mr Cameron while working at Carlton TV and is married to Steve Hilton, who was Mr Cameron’s director of strategy. The couple were also godparents to Mr Cameron’s late son Ivan.  
 
Steve McNamara, general secretary of the Licensed Taxi Drivers’ Association (LTDA), said: “The lobbying pressure Boris Johnson is under is intense, and Boris blows in the wind.”  
 
But Garrett Emmerson, TfL’s chief operating officer for “surface transport”, said: “We have not treated, and do not treat, Uber any differently to any other London operator and we are satisfied that Uber currently complies with private hire licensing requirements.”  
 
A spokesman for Uber defended its position, including its “price surging” in times of demand, such as during tube strikes, and insisted there is room for all.  
 
He added: “Black cabs are a British icon and we have no desire to see them disappear.”  
 ‘Luddite’ slur City Hall arrest as tempers flare during protest  

 
Campaigners make their feelings about Uber clear as they protest behind London Assembly officials in a picture tweeted by Murad Qureshi 
 
CABBIES caused a massive road block around Bank Station last night (Thursday) during rush-hour in the latest protest against Uber, writes Tom Foot. 
 
It was the second of six weekly protests planned by the United Cabbies Group (UCG) union and follows a major row at City Hall last week during the Mayor’s Question Time when a security guard was allegedly assaulted. 
 
Tempers flared after Mayor Boris Johnson entered the meeting and compared the cabbies waiting in the public gallery to “Luddites”. 
 
The Luddites were a working-class political movement of the early 19th century weavers and textile workers who fought for better employment rights, at a time when technolo­gical advances of the day were forcing many into unemploy­ment. 
 
But Mr Johnson was used the term to imply that the cabbies’ views are becoming outdated and that they are afraid to move with the times. 
 
A security guard was knocked unconscious by one protester, according to City Hall officials, and the Met Police said on Monday it had arrested a 65-year-old man on suspicion of assault. 
 
Labour Group leader Len Duvall added: “Whilst there is no excuse for the disruptive – and in some cases violent – actions of some in the audience, the Mayor needs to understand that it was his name-calling which in part sparked today’s incident.” 
 
The UCG yesterday distanced itself from the “violence” at City Hall last week, saying that the man who was arrested for the alleged assault “was not a licensed taxi driver” and appeared to have “simply tagged along”.  
 
In a statement, it added: “We respect­fully ask that members of ideological protest groups keep away from our future demonstra­tions.”