Broward commissioners to vote on restoring Uber, Lyft in county
FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. (WSVN) -- Broward commissioners are expected to vote Thursday on whether to bring back Uber and Lyft to the county, a highly anticipated decision that follows hours of spirited testimony both for and against the popular ride sharing services. 

Representatives from taxi cab companies and drivers from Uber and Lyft stated their cases inside the commission chambers. "I love it. I think that the commission should fight back," said Uber opponent Charles King. "I think you guys have the power to stop Uber." 

A Lyft driver stressed that the service creates new jobs. "This is what I do; this is my full-time [employment]," he said. "It pays really good." 

Commissioners are attempting to work out the specifics of a new ordinance that, if approved, would restore the "transportation network companies," but not everyone is on board. A contentious sticking point is insurance liability. "Uber drivers, I hate to tell you, but you can be personally sued, and you can be liable for that, and that is what the county commission is trying to prevent," said Broward County Commissioner Barbara Sharief. 

Insurance agent Charles King voiced his misgivings about the lack of responsibility from Uber drivers. "I know about a dozen people that drive for Uber, and not one of them reports to their insurance company what they're doing," he said. 

Meanwhile, Uber representatives do not appear to be satisfied with the proposed ordinance, and they picked apart the proposed law and requested several changes. The company's objections included: a proposed ban on hiring convicts released in the last seven years from prison or on drivers who county staff believe pose a "threat to public safety'' because they committed crimes of "moral turpitude," as well as a provision for unlimited county audits of Uber's adherence to the law. 

Among other points of contention in the new ordinance are over county-run background checks on Uber drivers, as well as a portion of the law that says Uber cannot hire convicted felons released from prison in the last seven years. 

A Broward resident also expressed her objections toward the ride sharing services. "I don't believe in electronic hitchhiking, which is basically what Uber is," she said. 

Before Uber and Lyft start operating again, county officials are asking for back payment on any fees their cars should have paid for drop-offs and pickups at Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport, like taxi cabs pay. "It impacts our businesses to the tune of tens of millions of dollars," said GO Airport Shuttle CEO George Platt. 

Commissioners will have to decide on these issues and a few others in the ongoing showdown between the emerging ride technology and the existing, strictly regulated for-hire car industry. 

Uber stopped serving Broward County customers July 31, after passage of a law tailored for "transportation network companies'' whose drivers use personal vehicles and are connected to customers via a smartphone app. In total, commissioners are discussing 12 amendments to the ordinance, which suggests Thursday's debate will be lengthy. 

Taxi cab company officials have threatened to pursue legal action if Uber and Lyft return to Broward.