4 more die as flood situation remains grim, nearly 10L hit
Guwahati: The flood situation in Assam continues to be grim with four more deaths reported from across the state on Wednesday.

The second wave of floods has claimed at least 26 lives so far and affected nearly 10 lakh people. Also, nearly two lakh hectares of cropland have been damaged.

Assam State Disaster Management Authority (ASDMA) on Wednesday said while two persons were killed in Naduar revenue circle of Sonitpur district, one death each was reported from Mayong revenue circle of Morigaon district and Samaguri revenue circle of Nagaon district.

On Tuesday, one person died in Chabua revenue circle of Dibrugarh district and another went missing in the Doomdooma revenue circle of Tinsukia district.

Nineteen out of 27 districts are reeling under floods with the Brahmaputra flowing above the danger mark in Guwahati, Dibrugarh, Jorhat, Sonitpur, Goalpara and Dhubri. Major tributaries of the Brahmaputra were also flowing above the danger mark.

On the other hand, the opposition has accused the state and central governments of doing little for helping the flood hit.

After touring several flood-affected districts of Lower Assam, All India United Democratic Front (AIUDF) chief Badruddin Ajmal alleged that both the state and central governments were maintaining aloofness even as lakhs of people were displaced by the deluge.

"Even as more than two weeks have passed, we are yet to see a proactive role from the central and state governments. Lakhs of people are in great misery because of the devastation wreaked by the floods. It is very unfortunate that at the time of high floods, the political parties ruling the state and central governments are locked in petty politics," Ajmal said.

Ajmal also alleged that the proactive role of the Centre during the Jammu and Kashmir floods last year is missing in case of Assam.

According to ASDMA, 9,98,730 people have been affected and over 300 relief camps opened in 19 affected districts.

On the other hand, hundreds of affected people in Barpeta have resorted to hunger-strike since Monday, demanding proper rehabilitation from the government. The water resources department said the flood situation aggravated because of incessant rain in upper catchment areas of the Brahmaputra and its tributaries in Bhutan and Arunachal Pradesh.