Rajnath Singh to be the Chief Guest for 11th  Formation day of NDMA
MIL OSI – 
 
Source: Government of India – Press Release/Statement: 
 
Headline: Press Information Bureau 
Government of India 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
27-September-2015 15:59 IST 
  Rajnath Singh to be the Chief Guest for 11th  Formation day of NDMA 
Union Home Minister to release Emergency Management Training Manual and NDMA’s Quarterly Newsletter “SAMVAD” tomorrow 
  
The Union Home Minister, Shri Rajnath Singh will be the Chief Guest and the Minister of State for Home Affairs, Shri Kiren Rijiju will be the Guest of Honour on the occasion of 11th Formation Day of the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), the Apex Policy Body for Disaster Management in India, on September 28, 2015 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi. 
 
The inaugural session of the Formation Day will be followed by 4 Technical Sessions on major calamities namely cyclone, earthquake, floods and landslides. The first one is on Cyclone and implementation of World Bank Aided National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP). The first Session will have  presentations from NDMA, IMD and States of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh. The second session is on earthquake risk mitigation where Government of Gujarat, Government of  Sikkim and  Ministry of Earth Sciences will share their experiences in terms of best practices and lessons learnt in the areas of seismic risk reduction. The third session is focused on Flood Risk Mitigation where State Governments of Assam and Bihar as well as Central Water Commission will highlight and share the measures and insights on flood management and control. The fourth session is focused on Landslides risk mitigation where State Government of Uttarakhand and Government of West Bengal and Geological Survey of India will highlight areas of concerns in the areas of Landslides risk management in the country. 
 
The Training Manual on How to Conduct Emergency Management Exercise (EMEx) will be released by the Home Minister during the Inaugural Function. This Training Manual has been prepared on the basis of experiences gained from several emergency management exercises conducted by NDMA. The EMExes are large scale urban exercises focusing on capacity building of various stakeholders engaged in the areas of Disaster Management (DM) and creation of a pool of master trainers in each emergency support function of the respective city/urban area. The training manual will guide the States and stakeholders as a ready reckoner to undertake Emergency Management Exercises in a scientific manner. The inaugural session will also witness the Release of the First Edition of NDMA’s Quarterly Newsletter “SAMVAD” as a channel of communication and a  platform for dialogue amongst the various stakeholders involved in the cause of disaster risk reduction. 
 
Over the last one decade, NDMA has been playing a leading role in centre – staging Disaster Management into the Governance Paradigm of the country. The past one year has witnessed the Authority performing diverse tasks such as coordinating and monitoring relief support for major disasters, formulation of important National Guidelines, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), implementing projects of national importance and facilitating sustained dialogue with Nodal Ministries and Departments of the Government of India and States. 
 
Dr. P.K. Mishra, Additional Principal Secretary to Prime Minister will deliver the Valedictory Address during the Valedictory Session in the afternoon. 
 
*** 
 
KSD/BK 
. 
 
 
 
  
– – 
 
© Multimedia Investments Ltd Terms of Use/Disclaimer.